hello my son welcome to the third
question from Tom rocks math and I love
mathematics thank you for watching thank
you for everyone for sending me your
questions thank you for voting the
winning question this week is what would
be the Earth's gravitational field if it
was hollow this is a little bit of a
trickier question than the other ones
that I've looked at I'm going to do my
best to explain it as simply as possible
the first thing we need to do is to
define what our Hollow Earth looks like
and what it's made from
so there are a few things you can do
here we could say imagine the Earth has
the same mass what happens to be hollow
so they're sort of bit remaining the
shell would be really really get really
heavy or we need to take up a sense of
it and then have the density
distribution the same as it currently is
on the earth or we could just have a
constant density throughout so now let's
define the set up we have our Hollow
Earth is like a doughnut shape so this
is the shell which has mass and in the
middle it's hollow there's no mass and
the way I've defined this is such that
the inner ring has radius a and then the
outer ring has radius B and so what that
means is when you look at the
distribution of density in our earth
when the radius is less than or equal to
a so inside the hollow myth the density
is zero when we move between the radius
of a and the radius B so inside the
shell where there is like there is mass
the density is given by this function to
come to in a minute and then for the
radius greater than B so outside of our
earth the density is also 0 and in the
bit of the middle what I've done here is
create a linear function of the radius
so when the radius is a your density is
Rho naught which is just some generic
value some basic value times a over B
where a lesson
so it's less than Rho not and when you
move right further out that gradually
increases and our increases from a
towards B and when you get to be you
reach the exact density Rho naught now
that we know the density distribution of
our Hollow Earth we just need to use a
fancy physics law to get the
gravitational field and the one we need
is Gauss's flux law this is a general
physical law and it relates the density
distribution of a planet or of an object
or a body to the gravitational field of
that body so how the mass of the object
relates to its gravitational force
depending on how far and around where
you are in relation to the object and
Gauss's law is very very general rather
than writing down the general form I'm
just going to write down the particular
form that we need because it simplifies
a lot when you have two particular
conditions the first condition is that
your object is a sin so the earth is a
fish and our follower is also a sphere
so that's okay the second condition is
that your object has spherical symmetry
so what this means is that the only
variable that matters is the radius so
the angle doesn't matter and this is
also true for Earth if you think about
it in terms of gravity if you're stood
say here in the UK gravity is the same
as if you're stood on the opposite side
of the world in Australia that the
gravitational force is the same provided
you're on the same distance same radius
from the Earth's center
the angles doesn't matter and so that
means it has spherical symmetry
underneath assumptions Gauss's block law
just becomes this very nice simple
expression and this is that your
gravitational field at a distance
capital R is just equal
- - the universe of gravitational
constant G times the mass inside the
radius capital R which we will need to
calculate divided by the radius squared
and this is true for all distances from
the center are provided that you are not
actually on the center of its success
so for Newton's universal law of
gravitation you would have to take the
limit as your our Lord tending to zero
you have to shrink in onto that central
point and that would recover Newton's
law of gravity the universal constant of
gravity this G which was discovered by
Newton is it's always the same - the
constant value one equals six point
seven times ten to the minus of ever
sometimes it's a really really small
number but it always so is there and
always pops up when you're doing
calculations involving gravity you'll
notice that we divide by the radius
squared divided by the distance squared
and this is the classic sort of
gravitational theory where gravity
decreases according to the distance
squared the most important thing about
cows and slugs law in this particular
form is that our gravitational field
only depends on the mass and so we have
to consider three different cases first
case for the Iranian less than or equal
to a so within size a planet there's no
mass inside us we can draw any ring any
radius R from the center along with
inside a and there's never any mass
inside of it so M R here is simply to
zero for the second case where we are
now inside the shell this is a bit
trickier because we do now have mass and
as we move further out the mass will
increase and therefore the gravitational
field was changed because it's
on the maps or the much changes field
once also change and so we need to work
out the mass that's contained within a
disk of radius capital R where R lies
between a and B and to do this to work
out the mass of something what you do is
you integrate the density function so we
know that the distribution of density
and in particular we know it inside the
shell so between a and B so we have to
integrate this function between a and
our radius capital R so I've now done
the integral of the density function
where we're integrating between the
inner radius a and our radius capital R
which has to be less than B and of
course with the steps here I would bore
you with the details it's quite
technical but it's relatively
straightforward if you understand the
integration and spherical polar
coordinates but the key point is you get
this answer here which is PI beta
density Rho naught divided by V and R to
the fourth minus a to the fourth now is
the gravitational field at a distance
capital R from the center of our Hollow
Earth where our lives inside the shell
and the last part is also relatively
simple because we've worked out the
middle one because all that it depends
on is the total mass that's inside where
you're standing so if we're standing at
a distance capital R which is now
greater than or equal to B so we have
attained somewhere the mass is just
simply the entire mass of the whole
planet that's what this M R will be and
we know what the mass is anywhere inside
the shell so that means we do know what
the matter is and we get to the edge of
the shell which is the whole planet so
we simply just replace the Capitals are
in our equation for the middle bit with
B because that's the farthest extent of
our planet that's where the max stopped
and that gives us our final solution
here in our third area now that we know
the gravitational field in these three
discs
areas so we know it inside the hollow
part of the planet we know what it is
inside the shell of the planet and we
know what it is outside we just put all
three pieces together to get the full
gravitational field so as any distance
from the center of our hollow planet the
gravitational field is given and well
defined by this function I hope that
comes with the question thank you
everybody for watching don't forget to
subscribe you can also find me on
Facebook Twitter and Instagram for apps
on rocks map and check out my website
Tom Ransome ascom and of course please
keep sending your questions in and
please keep voting until next time
goodbye